docs/Dialects/Moore.md, before:

# Moore Dialect

This dialect provides operations and types to capture a SystemVerilog design after parsing, type checking, and elaboration.

[TOC]


## Rationale

The main goal of the `moore` dialect is to provide a set of operations and types for the `ImportVerilog` conversion to translate a fully parsed, type-checked, and elaborated Slang AST into MLIR operations.
See IEEE 1800-2017 for more details about SystemVerilog.
The dialect aims to faithfully capture the full SystemVerilog types and semantics, and provide a platform for transformation passes to resolve language quirks, analyze the design at a high level, and lower it to the core dialects.

In contrast, the `sv` dialect is geared towards emission of SystemVerilog text, and is focused on providing a good lowering target to allow for emission.
The `moore` and `sv` dialect may eventually converge into a single dialect.
As we are building out the Verilog frontend capabilities of CIRCT it is valuable to have a separate ingestion dialect, such that we do not have to make disruptive changes to the load-bearing `sv` dialect used in production.


## Types

### Simple Bit Vector Type

The `moore.iN` and `moore.lN` types represent a two-valued or four-valued simple bit vector of width `N`.

| Verilog    | Moore Dialect |
| ---------- | ------------- |
| `bit`      | `!moore.i1`   |
| `logic`    | `!moore.l1`   |
| `reg`      | `!moore.l1`   |
| `byte`     | `!moore.i8`   |
| `shortint` | `!moore.i16`  |
| `int`      | `!moore.i32`  |
| `integer`  | `!moore.l32`  |
| `longint`  | `!moore.i64`  |
| `time`     | `!moore.l64`  |

### Default Values

Behavior of unconnected ports:

| Port Type        | Unconnected Behavior       |
| ---------------- | -------------------------- |
| Input (Net)      | High-impedance value ('Z)  |
| Input (Variable) | Default initial value      |
| Output           | No effect on Simulation    |
| Inout (Net)      | High-impedance value ('Z)  |
| Inout (Variable) | Default initial value      |
| Ref              | Cannot be left unconnected |
| Interconnect     | Cannot be left unconnected |
| Interface        | Cannot be left unconnected |

Uninitialized variables:

| Type                | Default initial value           |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| 4-state integral    | 'X                              |
| 2-state integral    | '0                              |
| `real`, `shortreal` | 0.0                             |
| Enumeration         | Base type default initial value |
| `string`            | "" (empty string)               |
| `event`             | New event                       |
| `class`             | `null`                          |
| `interface class`   | `null`                          |
| `chandle`           | `null`                          |
| `virtual interface` | `null`                          |

[include "Dialects/MooreTypes.md"]


## Operations

[include "Dialects/MooreOps.md"]

Commit message:

[ImportVerilog] Add basic event type support
Add rudimentary support for the `event` type to ImportVerilog by
treating events as `i1` signals, where an event is signaled by inverting
the value of the signal. There are likely more subtleties here that we
will need to handle in the future. This covers some of the basics,
though.

docs/Dialects/Moore.md, after:

# Moore Dialect

This dialect provides operations and types to capture a SystemVerilog design after parsing, type checking, and elaboration.

[TOC]


## Rationale

The main goal of the `moore` dialect is to provide a set of operations and types for the `ImportVerilog` conversion to translate a fully parsed, type-checked, and elaborated Slang AST into MLIR operations.
See IEEE 1800-2017 for more details about SystemVerilog.
The dialect aims to faithfully capture the full SystemVerilog types and semantics, and provide a platform for transformation passes to resolve language quirks, analyze the design at a high level, and lower it to the core dialects.

In contrast, the `sv` dialect is geared towards emission of SystemVerilog text, and is focused on providing a good lowering target to allow for emission.
The `moore` and `sv` dialect may eventually converge into a single dialect.
As we are building out the Verilog frontend capabilities of CIRCT it is valuable to have a separate ingestion dialect, such that we do not have to make disruptive changes to the load-bearing `sv` dialect used in production.


## Types

### Simple Bit Vector Type

The `moore.iN` and `moore.lN` types represent a two-valued or four-valued simple bit vector of width `N`.

| Verilog    | Moore Dialect |
| ---------- | ------------- |
| `bit`      | `!moore.i1`   |
| `logic`    | `!moore.l1`   |
| `reg`      | `!moore.l1`   |
| `byte`     | `!moore.i8`   |
| `shortint` | `!moore.i16`  |
| `int`      | `!moore.i32`  |
| `integer`  | `!moore.l32`  |
| `longint`  | `!moore.i64`  |
| `time`     | `!moore.l64`  |

### Event Type

The SystemVerilog `event` type is represented as a `!moore.i1` value.
A variable `event e` is lowered to the equivalent of `bit b`.
Triggering an event through `-> e` is lowered to the equivalent of `b = ~b`.
Waiting on an event through `@(e)` is lowered to the equivalent of `@(b)`.

### Default Values

Behavior of unconnected ports:

| Port Type        | Unconnected Behavior       |
| ---------------- | -------------------------- |
| Input (Net)      | High-impedance value ('Z)  |
| Input (Variable) | Default initial value      |
| Output           | No effect on Simulation    |
| Inout (Net)      | High-impedance value ('Z)  |
| Inout (Variable) | Default initial value      |
| Ref              | Cannot be left unconnected |
| Interconnect     | Cannot be left unconnected |
| Interface        | Cannot be left unconnected |

Uninitialized variables:

| Type                | Default initial value           |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| 4-state integral    | 'X                              |
| 2-state integral    | '0                              |
| `real`, `shortreal` | 0.0                             |
| Enumeration         | Base type default initial value |
| `string`            | "" (empty string)               |
| `event`             | New event                       |
| `class`             | `null`                          |
| `interface class`   | `null`                          |
| `chandle`           | `null`                          |
| `virtual interface` | `null`                          |

[include "Dialects/MooreTypes.md"]


## Operations

[include "Dialects/MooreOps.md"]
